Behind now, are we? Yeah, we are, so. Hello.
Transparency International, they're in by Zoom.
Hello, how are you? Yeah, sorry about that, I just...
No, let's go. Now, we've got 10 minutes with you.
The committee, just for people beaming in for this, please leave some time for questions.
Otherwise, I just have to cut you off, and that's not very helpful.
The committee does like to ask questions. We've all read your submissions,
so we don't have to keep going through and laboring them, because we've read them.
Okay, the time issuers, thanks.
Sure. I mean, I think taking that the submission is read.
I just think there's three main issues, and that was one is the integrity of electoral processes generally.
The second is oversight and accountability and reporting, especially on things like special votes.
We don't think there's anybody who's got an eye on that,
and I'm afraid it doesn't seem to be the second committee either.
And the third one is education and information for new candidates,
because then there's misinformation as well and disinformation,
but those are the ones, the main ones.
So what we think is, and I think other people have spoken on it,
is that the kind of rigour that's enabled by the Electoral Commission running the central election
is not then enabled in the local government elections,
and that's putting stress on everywhere.
We've recommended to move away from postal voting,
because that's clearly not working, and I appreciate there's a lot of complexity in there.
But also, we're really concerned about recent events in the last election.
I realise that none have got to the police prosecution yet,
but they were certainly significant enough to void an election result.
And that was a serious concern, probably the largest.
Whatever it was, somebody took those votes out of people's letterboxes,
somebody faked the votes.
And that's a hugely serious issue that needs to be dealt with more than just by the police.
So I would have thought an inquiry would have been the best approach to that.
Anyway, I think that's all I'm saying.
We've got sort of what we've said, and so I'm happy to answer questions.
All right. Thank you very much.
I've got the first question from Mr Calvates.
Thanks very much, Chair. Thanks very much for your submission.
Found it really an interesting read.
Was interested in your point made under 2B1
about conduct of elections and processes prior to election day
for raising issues, and just interested if you had any thoughts about how that could occur?
Yes, I would be trying to nut that through as well.
How would you actually manage it?
I suppose you could have the initiation of an inquiry
at the point at which it's raised.
It's possible that I don't think there was any ability for people to,
for the Electoral Officer to have initial inquiries,
to have an inquiry inquiry.
It certainly is a problem, and it's not for me to work out
because I think it needs a good legal brain to work out
what's fair and due process around that.
After all, you are in the middle of an election.
It's possible. You don't want to attract people attacking others
just for the sake of putting an election off.
You don't want to smirch the name of any,
but on the other hand, it was such a serious issue,
and it could only be dealt with afterwards,
and I think there has to be a mechanism.
If there was an Electoral Commission role,
that would be the place for it to be considered.
So it would be lodged with the Electoral Commission
during the election process.
OK. OK.
Ms Celia Boyle.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your submission
and your concerns about transparency and democracy.
You've mentioned the report
of the local government electoral working group,
and you would generally believe that having local elections
run by the Electoral Commission
would be more transparent,
and it would be more transparent.
Would be more transparent than by two private companies
that we can't use the Official Informations Act on.
That's correct.
There's a number of reasons why we think it would be better,
and that education element also goes to that.
We tried, and also transparency,
and we tried very hard to find what the elements,
what people were being told at different sites,
seems to be quite variable.
There does not seem to be any consideration
in many of them,
that they're not actually talking about what you cannot do
and what's ethically not able to be done
or legally not able to be done.
You know, trying to appraise our voters, for example,
should be something that's 101 really
and a candidate's briefing.
That's the problem with a lot of new candidates
being new on every local body election.
You've got the potential for many more people
to really not understand what the electoral process isn't about,
and I think that was seen in a couple of other examples.
A couple of other examples there.
Thank you.
All right.
Hey, I've got to thank you for your submission.
It was a fascinating submission,
particularly going through all that analysis.
So, really appreciate you bringing that to attention.
Good.
I do think the problem with special votes
is also it's still not available
on the Government of Internal Affairs website.
So, that kind of lack of transparency
about what's happening with special votes
in those local elections is a real problem.
It means that you're not able to do your job properly either.
So, I think that's a significant issue
around the elections and that's partly
because you've got private providers doing that work.
Okay.
Thank you.
Right.
Now, we've got the Green Party
at ByZoom.
Mr. Summable, are you with us?
He's on folks.
Just going through it.
Okay.
Mr. Summable, if you're there, that'd be great.
Good morning, Mr. Summable.
Now, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Right.
Thank you very much.
I'm Alan Summable.
I'm co-convener of the Greens
Local Government Caucus.
Local Government Caucus represents
28 elected members around the country
who were endorsed by the Green Party
in the 2025 elections.
I'm a regional councillor
with the Otago Regional Council
and I'm here in
in Autoporty, Dunedin.
I'll concentrate on a few parts
of our written submission,
the parts where I have
the closest personal knowledge
and experience.
I guess our starting point
is the belief that
it should be straightforward for people to vote
and that goes back into the principles.
I can refer to the principles of the local
electoral act in 2001
where it says all qualified persons
have a reasonable and equal opportunity
to cast an informed vote
and it talks about public confidence
and public understanding
of local electoral processes.
So I think my first point
is that the
postal voting system
is well past its use by date
and it effectively
excludes many people from casting a vote.
I'll relate some of my experience
from Dunedin last year.
In July last year
we did a
Green Party members did a round of door knocking
in different parts of Dunedin
with the intent of
asking people
are you enrolled and getting them enrolled to vote.
One area we
concentrated on was North Dunedin
an area with a high transient population
with many student
tertiary students there.
What we found
was mail composting in letterboxes
down the street including
pile of orange electoral
commission envelopes
and naturally of course we directed people
to the voting Z website to get them enrolled.
We returned
to the area in September
and found in
North Dunedin the majority of people
had not received their voting papers
that was either
because they had moved flats from last year
and not updated their address
in spite of our best efforts
or they were enrolled
at their parents address in another town
and so did not receive their voting papers.
So the postal voting system
it's certainly not the whole
explanation for the low voter turnout
but I think it is part of it.
As a solution
I'd go with the
old GNZ proposals
I think you've heard from them this morning
and they've gone into that in great detail
so please
let's retire the postal voting system
and have something better in place
before 2028.
Another important
point for us is to say
let's use STV for
all elections in all councils
be consistent
and use the more democratic STV approach.
Again using
Otago for an example
the Otago Regional Council
and the Dunedin City Council use STV
the other councils in the region
use first past the post
so it ended up
with the situation that voters in
Queenstown Lakes District Council
Central Otago and Clutha
had two voting systems
to contend with
in the same set of voting papers
I see this evidence
presented to you in their submission
by the Greater Wellington Regional Council
saying this is robust data
across numerous Australian elections
clear evidence of a higher level
of informal votes where electives
are asked to apply different voting systems
in multi-member elections
so let's not
put those additional barriers
for people let's use the one system
and
also propose
to increase government resourcing
to aid the participation of people
with disabilities. One specific
suggestion from us
is to apply the Electoral Access Fund
also to local
body elections
so going back to the local
Electoral Act 2001
all qualified persons have a reasonable
and equal opportunity to accept
nomination as a candidate
and that use of the Electoral Access Fund
would assist with that
you'll have seen that
a part of our submission was on handling
of role data
there are some specific recommendations
that's not my area of expertise
but that's still useful stuff
I'll be pleased to take any questions now
Right well rather unsurprisingly
we've got Celia Wade-Brown
who wants to ask you a question
Cura
Alan
thank you for presenting this
I'm interested in the area
of consistency between
local and central government
election processes
and
the postal
versus in person
and the commission running the education makes sense
presumably
you would want to see
some alignment
in the enrollment rule
so at the moment as I understand it
the local government you can enroll
up to the day before
until recently central government
you could enroll on the day
and now that's been rolled back
should we settle on something
that is common to both
systems
I think that consistency is very
helpful and in that example
that you have given
our very very strong preference
would be to
be able to enroll right up until
election day but yeah
there are a number of places
where that consistency can be brought in
and one way of achieving that
would be to have the electoral commission
managing local body
local council elections as well
thank you
can I ask you a question
you said in respect to overseas voters
they should get their voting papers earlier
how many people
actually vote
living in London or New York or Singapore
in a local election
in the old New Zealand
we have difficult again for a national election
do you know what the numbers are
look I'm afraid I do not know
the answer to that
I know
specific question
I don't have any other questions
thank you for your time this morning
it's a good submission
thanks for the opportunity to present
right now we're going to
Joe Daly from
the Christchurch City Council by Zoom
are you there
I presume it's
oh good morning
just
yeah we're still going
now we've got 10 minutes with you
we have read your submission but
the time is yours
you know
I'm Joe Daly
I'm the Council's Governance Advisor
and I'm also our Deputy Electoral Officer
I do have an apology
from our elected members who are currently
sitting through annual plan hearings
day two of
you've obviously got the council's
submission and I'll just reiterate
a few key points from that
including those
related to your terms of reference
and I'll also just introduce a couple of points
from some work council's staff have done
post-election
in analyzing the voter turnout
and from
survey responses to some election-related
questions
council's consistently
submitted in support of changes to
legislation to allow for the modernization
of voting
increasing civic education
and awareness nationally
accessibility including to those
overseas and improving central
government support and funding
for local elections
like probably everyone you're hearing from
we are concerned
at the decline of voter participation
and the ability to attract
good candidates
and these matters are in line with the
national trends
the Justice Committee
in the time I've been working closely with elections
has made many recommendations
relating to these matters
which disappointingly haven't
been progressed.
In particular the consistent theme
from those recommendations is regarding
modernization and alternative voting
methods, review of postal
challenges
including alternatives for overseas
and the review of voting systems
and methods so we're really keen to
see some of those recommendations
and recommendations you
yourselves may make
actually progressed
rather than staying in a report
just regarding the voting process
the key
a question you asked regarding disallowed
special voters
we had 82% of
those that returned special voting documents
allowed and the majority
of those disallowed were because they
weren't able to be verified on the electoral
role so that could have
rolled into the next point
regarding the electoral roles
we didn't have any significant issues with
them
the majority
of
electors who enrolled
or were on the unpublished role
who enrolled past the close
of the final role
didn't receive clear
or full information on what they needed to do
to be able to vote
so we see that that is really an opportunity
for
change
particularly those unpublished role electors
we've got over 3000
votes
and only 26%
of them
received
requested special voting documents
because they received correspondence
from the Electoral Commission but there's not much detail
in there apart from
contact the council if you want to make a vote
there's an opportunity to put more
information in there
be strongly supportive of that
just regarding the vote bins
we had
special voting
in all our council facilities
including our recreation centres
we also had them at the airport
at the university library
and in supermarkets
so they worked really well
and neighbouring councils used similar
and we were promoting
that voting documents could be
returned across those boundaries
because we all used the same
election service provider
and we also had special voting
and onsite voting available
from 12 sites
across the city so that was Monday
to Friday and we also had
sites open specifically for that
on the weekend
prior to election day and election day
so there's quite a lot of effort made
in making it as accessible
as possible
we didn't have any significant issues raised
regarding integrity
in Christchurch or not that I
or our electoral officer were aware of
but reports from
candidates about online
activity from other candidates in the public
which I'm sure you're well aware of
those kind of concerns
we did receive a number of queries
regarding the requirements
entitlements or qualifications
necessary for a person
to stand as an elected member
which was something very
we have an external
Electoral Officer now
and that has worked
well with our staff
and with regard to the Electoral Commission
as you'll see from the submission
strongly support
an increased role in them with good
consultation on how that works
myself and our communications team
work really closely
with our local Electoral Commission
engagement team
we attend events together
we make sure there's always voting
information in our sites
and things like that
and we have a partnership and a really good example
of what perhaps could happen nationally
and just a couple
of comments on our participation
that you would have seen
we had reduced participation
down to 38%
we've got 16 geographical
wards across the city
and the turnout varied
from 53% in banks
a smaller community
to 27%
in Rickerton
we source some information from the Electoral Commission
to match with data
provided by our service provider
on those that voted
the results weren't surprising
only one in four electors
from 18 to 24 voted
over half the electors
from 65 to 79 voted
demographics
covered
25% of electors
with Maori descent voted
compared with 39%
without
and many of the wards with that lower turnout
were also wards with higher
instances of socioeconomic
deprivation
and we had our life in Christchurch
survey which is an annual survey
we do, it went out to
40,000 people and we had
nearly four and a half thousand
surveys returned
and these are people that have
engaged with council or put themselves
on this panel
and the key statistics
from that report on responses
which we're still finalising
is 90% of those people
who responded indicated they voted
89% of those respondents
indicated they found it very easy
or easy to vote
and the biggest identified reason
for not voting was they didn't get
around to it
they couldn't find enough information about the candidates
or they couldn't find a candidate
that appealed
final comments on May
that they told us were
what would make it easier to vote
over half the respondents indicated being able to vote
online
as you'd imagine we had a lot of comments
about postal being out of date
unhelpful, not user friendly
we have 42%
of those respondents wanted more
information about candidates and what they stand for
and 28%
of those candidates
of those respondents
indicated they were more active in the community
during the election
thank you for the opportunity
questions
at this time
we've got one from Mr Dan
Rosevon
you mentioned here about voting documents
being
delivered by New Zealand Post
I was wondering
with New Zealand Post
warning back a lot of the services
across Church and Canterbury
how that might affect
the next election
if we go
continue with the status quo
with our voting system
we used a mixture of
New Zealand Post and DX
not aware of any significant issues
with that delivery
but obviously a reduction in services
raises concerns about the viability
of Post
and just referring to the comments
from the previous submitter
regarding use of letterboxes
these days and how many people
actually do get posted mail
can I
can I just ask
you obviously seem to run a pretty good
operation
what are your institutional arrangements
some councils use third parties
do you as yours basically
in-house the promotion
is that what I understood from
or implied from your comments before
we've got an external
electoral officer
and an external election service provider
but promotion
and sort of the general operations
excluding
the processing of votes
and distribution of votes
is done by council
special by allocation
all right thank you
I've got Celia White Brown
thank you Joe
I do have a question about how
presumably you support
the Government New Zealand electoral working group
thing that wants electoral commission
to take on a bigger
role how do you see
that best
if we were to go down that route at some stage
how do we combine
that national reach
with a more local focus
on who the candidates
are
where the meetings are that side
of
getting people to really think local
about who they're voting for
I'm just acknowledging
I'm presenting a council submission
so I may have some more detail
views but
in short in our submission we've referenced
you know the need for consultation
on how that's going to work
and you know potentially
that overarching national
messaging and things like that
with local promotion
being led by the councils
whether or not I would see that should
be the partnership with the commission
but sort of
aspects I think would need council leadership
Thank you
Thank you very much for your contribution this morning
and joining us from Christchurch
Thank you for the opportunity
Right now we've got
Councillor Richard Hill from Auckland Council
by Zoom
I think we've seen him
on there
Mr. Hill's are you there
Good morning
we've read your submission
so leave a little bit of
questions please
Thank you very much
I'll sort of read a lot of
what I'm going to say
just to make sure I get it right
but yes you've read our
submission but largely
obviously the 29% turnout
for Auckland
in my opinion disaster for democracy
but it is very concerning
for us
We do believe
there are
range of factors
that have led to that decline of participation
but we do consider that postal
voting is part of that
I think it was around 38%
of the people who said
they didn't vote
saying the reason was they filled it out
they didn't take it back they forgot to
and that's quite a big section of the community
who just didn't pop it back
so we think that postal voting
and the issues there
it also extended the timeframe this year
because of the postal
service situation we had to have
an additional week or so
because of the time the leaders go out
and the leaders can come back in
we consider that greater national leadership
and coordination
of the administration of local elections is required
in particular the council reiterates
its support for the electoral commission
to take responsibility for delivering local elections
given its experience administering
parliamentary elections
and the operational capability and independence
required to manage the elections at scale
Council would welcome strengthening the
integrity framework surrounding elections
current processes rely heavily on
the unsuccessful candidates initiating
court proceedings to challenge
election results and council
recommends that you could introduce
automatic recounts where margins are
small such we had some margins
that never got to a recount as low
as seven votes
in that
we acknowledge that voting method reform alone
will not reverse declining participation
a broader nationally coordinated approach
is required to improve public
understanding of local government
encourage participation in local elections
include strengthening civic education
increasing visibility of local elections
to a level comparable
to parliamentary elections
and consider structural reforms to enable greater
greater alignment between
local and central
functions
we obviously recommend
the aim is to modernise
their local electoral system
strengthen electoral integrity
and support for a new public participation
and we do think we need to transition away
from postal even if the government
removed postal as an option
it just has become
fairly untenable when
as a candidate delivering
pamphlets
to many letter boxes seeing just piles
of them sitting in the mud
wet and we have had
issues up here as you know
with the whole election being quashed
due to some concerns around
the integrity of those ballots and whether
people were collecting
ballots to vote for others
the
advance voting issues
when we had 188 I think
boxes around the
the whole city
we had good access to
drop votes off if people had them
and we did spend a lot of money
on advertising you know as a council
it's the private organisation that does
the vote inside of things
we recommend that
voters who are overseas during the election period
are enabled to access and return their voting documents
like the parliamentary elections
so parliamentary elections are really easy
if you're overseas you can basically take a picture
of your vote and send it in
that is not what is enabled under
for local government
special votes we want that to be
reviewed to simplify the information required
about
I don't think it was half about 40%
of our special votes
you know several thousand
were disallowed and some of that was to do
with
occupation being incorrect or occupation
not being written that is
not a requirement in parliamentary
special votes
required in local government so
someone was a student or someone changed their job
or someone just didn't want to fill out
the butcher or baker or
candlestick maker that was
actually their vote was disallowed
and when you had areas
there was a change
someone not getting elected by seven or
eight votes that could have been the difference
we want to
continue the provision of telephone
dictation voting
more support for voters with disabilities
or
talked about
recounts
and safeguards
sorry
we've got a few questions
we also
the last one was just
we support extending local government
to four years if the government does
potentially having them at the same time
the other one was investigating compulsory voting
in Brisbane I think they had a turn out
for local elections of 85%
and compulsory voting whereas in
Western Australia they don't and they're
down about the same as us 30%
so just investigating that
for local government
right first question is from Rheema
Markle
in your introduction
right now
you've been talking about
we
we found this
who is we
the Auckland council sorry
which other councillors were you
in liaison
with respect to this report
this submission has been approved by all councillors
and
had local board input as well
this is not my
this is not my personal submission sorry
did you actually talk to them and see
what can you add to this
report to this submission
everyone we had workshops
we had abilities to put information in and then it was
debated at full council
okay awesome thank you
can I ask another question
with respect to you said the
integrity of ballot papers
what are you referring to councillor
so there was lots of
anecdotal information
of people seeing including myself
ballots streamed across neighbourhoods
sitting wet in
areas Morris Williamson talked about them being
in letter boxes of houses
that were removed for the eastern busway
that didn't exist at all
and then we have had a
whole election poshed through a process
that the courts decided
that there were so many votes
of people that were
voted for but those people said
they didn't vote so there were
a lot of ballots that were
which one was that just to be absolutely
just to be absolutely
it's the Autara Papatoi Toys
election so at the moment
the elections going on at the moment so
yeah there clearly
is an issue there but also this
everyone has a story about
seeing just tons of votes sitting
and people going
yeah I know we've got the point
right I've got a question from
Camelia Village
thank you thanks Richard
for your submission I think the point
that you raised around the
issue with special votes is something
that the committee should note and I hope
that we're able to address that in our report
the question I had for you though is
you may or may not have had the opportunity
to see the report of local government
New Zealand which is obviously separate
from Council now I just wanted to know
if you agreed with
or Auckland Council agreed with their
recommendations and specifically
there seemed to be quite a bit of alignment
with what you were suggesting with the
Electoral Commission we also asked
them about how that would be paid for
and they indicated that it would
maybe a proposed suggestion
the central government
and local government paying some of the
costs of there being a living structure
has Auckland Council thought into
how the Electoral Commission
change if that was implemented
might be funded
yeah I mean I guess there are already
costs that would be shared anyway there's
already Electoral Commission already
doing this work so if we were
able to tap into that the same people
the same trained people to be able
to spread that and maybe that would be good training
for the central government election as well
not training because both should be
important but at the moment
we do our own structures pay our own
way have it private organisations
do the voting if throughout the process
that that was shared it would probably be
cheaper I imagine over time for everyone
but also it's standardised for everyone
they've got one port of call for both elections
thank you
right Celia, where are you Brown
good morning Richard I had a question
on the special
votes not the disallowed
ones I think that's been covered well
but that very big increase
in the number of special votes
and I wondered two things about it
first of all do you think
that the new
ability for
enrolment details to be automatically
updated like if somebody
changes their address through
Wakakotahi would help
secondly
do you know if people tried
to enrol or update
their enrolment details
on the morning because local government
that's not it you have to have been
rolled by the day before
do you have any information on
there was there were
people saying that they couldn't enrol
on the day but you couldn't
roll right up to the day which is helpful
but it's just disappointing that
significant number would disallowed due to
things like information being wrong
automatic updates would be amazing
a lot of people shown by the
sensors shown by the voting and
special votes moving around within a
three-year period lots of people
especially in Auckland you know
renters etc a lot of moving around
the floods was you know just placed
hundreds and hundreds of families
and so that you know the more
we can make it easier for people because
they're not thinking about it every day
oh I need to update my enrolment
until they get there and go why can't
I get my voting papers or why did someone
vote for me when I didn't vote
right thank you Mr Hills
for a comprehensive
submission this morning
and coming from Auckland
right I think
we've got Kay Jones who's
joining us becoming a regular
which is nice right we've got
Prime Ministers with you
Kia ora, can I see lovely to see you all
and there's some new faces I haven't
met before I would just
endorse many of the comments made by
local government New Zealand
Richard Hills I've been watching online
the previous ones and
also even more
strongly than my written submission
support the move away from postal voting
and to bring back a consistent
in-person vote
like we have for
national for central
parliamentary elections
I don't want to sort of
talk too long
because you know you may have questions
but an example
would be of community
education so a friend
who's a Muslim woman
in an area not
Wellington organised with
her community
education about what voting
rights are here
because this is something that some of the members
of the group did not have in their countries
of origin they are now New Zealand
permanent residents and citizens
and voting is new
so educating them about
parliamentary elections and that
system was a challenge but they
got through it they understood it
when it came to then say
by the way we also have
local government elections
which use a different process
it was a really
difficult
education
issue and unless
they actually by that stage knew
that they were not
engaged
with the process of posting
for some of them
they didn't have
security of housing
so the mail was difficult
there were a lot of things so that's just one group
but I'm also a community moderator
and in the online group
of over 2,000 people
that I moderate every week
there is somebody concerned about
a parcel missing or a parcel
being misdelivered to them and that's
parcels so we know about them
but people don't know what mail they don't
get except when there are reports
of oh if you're in that block of flats
all your ballot papers have been
strewn down the street and yes we had
those reports and yes we can
tell people they can get a special
vote if they know in advance
but for many of them the details they
get does not make it
easy and so they just don't vote
so there's a whole bunch of
people who don't get
their right to vote
because of procedural issues
as opposed to the much easier
process which is still not perfect
but easier
for being able to go to a voting booth
and cast your ballot
so I'll leave it to a question.
Thank you very much. Right, questions members?
Okay, not good.
Yes there's no question
I mean no one else
thank you very much. I think the burning question
we've heard so much about
postal votes and things like that
contributing to low
voter turnout
but it's very low
it's very low in Auckland
and you know we just
heard one of the councillors
go on about so many other things
but I look at people like him
I'm like why is it so low
in Brooklyn
and since we've got a bit of time
well I've lived in Auckland
and
because as you've gathered I'm a chatty person
who goes and talks with neighbours and other people
and gets engaged in communities
but that's not the case for everyone
there are many communities within
Auckland who tend to
operate within themselves
and unless they have a point
of engagement of somebody coming to them
or being part of their community
they don't see the relevance to them
there isn't sort of
a big
publicity campaign
to raise the awareness of what local
government does and how it connects
to them and why their votes
make a difference. We get far more
information and I'll definitely echo those
calls for
having the electoral commission
taking a stronger role
so that there can be more
work together with community groups
about raising the awareness
of what the importance of their vote
means and why they should have
an opportunity and of course
making sure it's simplified and modern
so like a special voting paper
that had this occupation
for somebody who's like am I a contractor
or am I a whatever you know all the
barriers need to be removed
to make it as simple as
as possible and it needs to be
done in advance not just in the last
two weeks before an election
because it takes people a while to get the head
around ideas and even things
like yes Auckland council
Wellington council many councils have
their meetings online but people don't
necessarily go to them and know
about them and you're going to be hearing
after me from Sam
Summers and people on the it's in the
ballot and they do a great job of trying
to make it lively and engaging
for what the voting is but
they're not able to do that thing
beforehand to say oh this is
really important. You get really good turnouts
at local government
events if there
is a particular issue
of importance whether it's a polluted river
or whether it's dog attacks
in an area but that's
you know a singles incident
type of thing and people don't always remember
that when it comes round to
the how can they actually
make sure that people who've got good ideas
get on the council and
can engage with them
you know. Alright hey thank you
Kay for coming again
for your submission. Thank you.
I'm going to ask Sam and Nick
I'll see you at the back. Are you
okay? Coming up I know we're a hit of time
the next one's schedule
is not available so
thanks for being a man of all
and this is the relevant
we're also live streaming
the select committee meeting for our
followers to also be a watch because a lot
of people don't know about our you can
watch these online. Okay so
we've got five minutes with you.
Ten. Yes. We tried to get
more but the committee said no.
No that's enough.
Yeah so it's in the ballot covered the
2025 local body elections I
actually think we may have covered the
better turnout councils on
numbers because many of the councils were to cover
broke the 50% mark
as you would
see in the submission we covered
most of the great Wellington regional councils
the lower half of the horizons
a good chunk of
community and also
a limited part of Waikato
the plan was to do more
money talks and when there's a lack of it
it does make a very
difficult to actually make it function
one thing I've noticed is when it comes to
local councils is no one wants to fund
coverage of the elections as a rule
we did have some support
from Manawatu district council
Haurwhanau district council,
and Cutterdale district council through
venue higher
charges not
billed in the case of Bay of
New regional council they approached us
for $500 grants
per meet the candidates event that
involves their candidates
and councils that
who charged us were Taurua district council
Palmerston or city council
Southwire rapid district council
Wellington city council
Hutt city council, Whakatane district
council and Western Bay of New district
council and we also did try
to apply for funding through grants through
some councils with a lot of
ghosting rejections
going from there
we
you know, and candidate participation rate
can be a bit all over the place some areas
it's like you're the best thing that's come into town
like Salwan Too Good with the TV show back in the day
and then others of them sit there and run away
like the plague and I'd like to say sorry to Celia's
former council of Wellington city council
but so many of them like to run away
like the plague but that's
the choice there. I did mainly
the production parts of doing
that in the Brazilian shows however, Nick is
the one who dealt with all the candidates
so would you like to take over?
Yeah, yeah
Hi, good morning everyone
so
one of my main roles was candidate liaison
and
I was very lucky to do that
now in general
it was really, really
really good communication between
the two
candidates and it's in the ballot
and
you know, there are a lot of times where
things could have been made a lot easier
with
help from the council
Sam or
If I could tell you district council was one that wouldn't
some candidates would not
tick the box or at least see
details so would try for the
Electoral Officer
was not doing it with a team foot barge post
other councils like
just forwarded it on
yeah, so sometimes
a battle
and this is something that
we do out of
civic duty
just
we believe it should be done
and
we have
we would like it to be easier
and more
that involved
well, it would
communication
you're
really essentially at the hands
of the council
for this one, yes, for local bodies we are
yeah, okay
right, hey, have we finished
now, sorry, I have
right, let's have some questions members
no doubt
I've thought one
thank you
I was speaking to Todd but
to be honest, I'm subbing and I'm not
completely all over the full conversation
I'm really curious to how long you guys have been around
or how long you've been doing
started at the 2020 general election
that went for a very interesting
process
in 2022 was when we
upgraded and I spent
three and a half grand on a broadcast computer
basically put into
TV quality broadcasting
to put on Facebook, YouTube and Twitch
and we've expanded to TikTok since then
and so
2022 local bodies, the Hamilton
West by-election
and then proceeded on to
the lower part of North Island for the 2023
general election, the Paul Boyack
by-election and we
covered a couple of by-elections, the Tauranga City Council
special local bodies
and the last local body elections
I would love to be there
but
I mean James Meagher's also
have expressed interest as well
for getting there, we would love to this year
I'd love to
go to places like Westport
and places in the middle of nowhere
but yeah it's not an easy
step when we've got a nice lovely body
of water
in the way but that is
I'd love to make it happen
I'll just take you to it
Billok. Thank you very much
I just wanted to make more
of a comment, thank you for your interest
in covering our democracy and I'm sure
that you've probably watched more of our speeches
than some of us at our table
and I'm very welcome
I'll put it this way, I can probably name off the names
as good as the Speaker can but I don't think
many people can. I think
he probably takes some lessons from you
in that regard.
Thank you, thank you so much.
That's fine.
I think we might bring this to a close.
Thank you very much.
Thank you for your contribution.
Nice to see you again.
Now we're going to go back to
Charlotte.
Mel Sir, is that right?
He's on the line, isn't she?
Hello, are you there?
Good point.
It's okay, I think, can we be in a minute?
Miss Mel Sir, are you available?
Good morning.
Nice to see you, sorry we jumped ahead.
No, that's okay.
Thank you so much for taking...
We've got five minutes.
We'd like to ask questions but
we bought redraw submission but maybe
highlight them just to keep it.
Yeah, well I'm actually going to go
through a little bit more.
So I hope there might be time for questions, there might not be.
So Tena koutou koutou.
I'm Charlotte, I'm a district councillor
in Wanganui.
So I am going to be speaking from my
direct experience of the 2025 elections
in our district and also in support
of my council's formal submission.
So central to my point today
is our local election system
is no longer aligned with the realities
of how people live, move
and engage with democracy.
The 2025 elections exposed
major weaknesses in both how voting
papers reached the level of the
people and how democratic information
reaches them.
The first is the growing
fragility of the postal voting.
For many years, postal
voting has been practical and trusted
but the conditions that made it effective
are changing.
People are moving more frequently between
rentals, temporary housing, family homes
and care settings.
And housing instability and transience
are now a new form of
voting.
At the same time, the postal system
itself is becoming less
central to everyday life.
Many people, particularly younger voters
simply did not interact with their
letterboxes in the same way previous generations
did.
During the campaign period, I personally
walked past many letterboxes containing
damaged and uncollected voting papers.
The image has stayed with me
because it symbolizes a voting system
that is now a normal reality for many New
Zealanders.
It symbolizes a voting system
that is becoming increasingly disconnected
from the realities of modern life.
And the
impact of this was visible and the growing
reliance on special votes.
In Wanganui, around 18%
of special votes were disallowed.
Approximately 500 people
who believed they had successfully
voted but whose votes were never counted.
And I want to be very clear
that 500 people thinking
they participated in local democracy
only to have their vote excluded
is not a low number.
It's a warning sign.
When some districts across the country
reported disallowance rates as high
as 60%, this points clearly
to a structural national issue,
not an isolated local error.
The second issue I want to emphasize
is the omission of Maori
ward candidate information that was seen
in multiple districts including my own.
Issue is not
simply the absence of profiles
for individual candidates.
The deeper harm is that many
candidate statements do more than just
describe the person standing.
They help voters understand the broader
purpose and democratic value
of dedicated Maori representation.
So when those profiles were
admitted, voters received
less civic information
about the value of Maori representation
itself.
That is particularly serious
where voters were simultaneously
being asked to vote in
referenda on where the Maori wards
should continue. So in effect
some voters were asked to decide
the future of Maori representation
while being given less information
about that representation than they
received for general ward positions.
That creates an inequitable
information environment
and it risks shaping referendum outcomes
themselves. In Wanganui
the omission also
exposed an accountability gap
because the election was being delivered
through a private contractual
agreement.
There was no sufficiently clear obligation
on the provider to own
and rapidly correct the error.
But something as fundamental
as democratic participation
accountability should never depend
on the fine print
of a contract.
For me these issues point to the same
conclusion. Incremental delivery
fixes are no longer enough.
Orange bins, DXMail and other mitigations
may improve convenience
but they do not address
the deeper structural weaknesses
now visible in local election delivery.
We need nationally
consistent standards for voter communication
special votes, candidate information
and election administration.
So I support transferring
operational responsibility for local elections
to the Electoral Commission
while preserving a strong local role
for councils in voter education
community outreach
and democratic leadership.
The systems should be nationally
robust. The relationships
must remain local.
So in closing, local democracy
depends on public trust.
If people cannot reliably
receive their voting papers
if hundreds of special votes are discarded
and if voters do not
receive equitable information
about the purpose of representation
itself then confidence
and the legitimacy of the result
is weakened.
This no longer is a matter of process
refinement. It is now a question
of democratic resilience.
Thank you.
Thanks councillor. I've got a question from Mr
Carl Bates.
Thanks councillor.
Charlotte good to see you this morning
and appreciate the breadth
of your submission and the issues you raised.
Just a detailed
question on the mail
issue
and highlighted the DX mail.
Any particular challenge with DX
mail versus New Zealand Post
and the success of that
and I appreciate that's an incremental
change issue but just interested
in any feedback on that because we've
received in the constituency office
feedback on DX mail and other
areas of public service
engagement. In terms of DX mail
being superior
or not as superior
not as successful
as New Zealand
delivery.
Any comments on that?
Minister?
I think we're
at time. Hey thank you for
your submission councillor
doing that under your personal
but very comprehensive submission
and thank you for that.
Thanks and all the best.
We're going to
go to Jess.
All right we can just
good morning
Dale are you
there with us?
Good morning
there you are.
Nice to see you both.
Hey now we've got 10 minutes with you
Will ahead of schedule
so thank you for coming on a bit earlier
but looking forward to hearing
what you have to say.
Can you hear me okay?
Yes we can.
So we'll take our submission
as read rather than going through
line by line and perhaps we can
just go straight to our
summary because obviously we'd like
more time for you guys to ask us
questions so
our summary is on our submission
on page 7
and the first conclusion
or recommendation really
is the legislative review
we would really encourage
if we can a comprehensive
review of our legislation local
electoral act is 25 years
old now it was written
even before the internet
so it does need
we believe a full review
and a full rewrite
particularly if and it's
a big if we are able to move
into some form of electronic voting
or something like that then the whole
act I believe needs a full
review.
The second point special
vote reform
one of the points that you
have asked us to comment on is the
number of disallowed special votes
and compared to allowed special votes
we believe that whole process
needs a review a rewrite
special votes play
a critical role
we are under quite strict
current legislative requirements
I follow those strict
legislative requirements
because I must as an electoral officer
and that does
mean invalidating a number of special
votes which is really
difficult because I'm invalidating them
on a technicality
and someone's gone to a lot of trouble
to exercise a special vote
and I as the electoral office come along
and disallowed because
they haven't signed it they haven't dated it
they haven't had it.
I think that's the most technicality
we've heard about occupation
but what specifically
Well a special vote
has to accompany a
a declaration must accompany a special vote
so it must be signed
and dated and
witnessed and the
occupation of course
one of the biggest issues
we had this time around was occupation
we know that the
electoral commission have now removed
the electoral commission from
their declarations
we would like to follow suit and have that removed
because it just makes sense
the rationale is that not everyone
has an occupation
what do you do there
so if we just want to have
parity with the electoral commission and have some of that
complexity removed
and a review of
that special vote process so we remove some of the barriers
okay cool
um
so that's the story
page
sorry to interrupt you but
no problem
I think postal voting
you will be aware
of the limitations of New Zealand Post
we also are aware
of the two
mail service providers
which you heard earlier on
New Zealand Post and DX Mail
this was the first time that we pretty much split the country
in two
so New Zealand Post did about half
and DX Mail did about half
and in my view
it worked very well
we had the longer voting period
we had two mail providers
and they split the country
and as I said in my view
I think it worked very well
it was also
complimented by a significant increase
in vote boxes in the community
where people could then
hand deliver it in their places where they go
supermarkets and that sort of stuff
libraries where they actually
visit
we do
you are aware that Auckland Council
is
considering going to booth voting
we are doing a lot of work on that on the Electrolobz
for Auckland Council
doing a lot of work on that
we are talking
with them
I don't think it's a silver bullet
there are a number of things that
concern me a little bit with moving back
to booth voting
the cost increase is going to be significant
I don't think the voter turnout
is going to increase at all
I think in fact it may decrease
and I think the resources
needed for booth voting is quite significant
and because of that
there is probably a bit of risk
in there for local government
but it is permitted under the legislation
and it is a political decision
systems
and quality assurance
that is with the
issue we had with the
Porta Key District Council where
and I put my hand up totally for that one
I did the final checker
of everything that goes out of my office
and I check absolutely everything
and I missed it
so it was as simple as that
we had it on the voting document
it was not in the candidate profile statement
I didn't see that
the checking process before
we didn't see that
however we have learnt from that
and our software
is being amended now
so that there is an automatic cross checker
if it is on the voting document it is in the booklet
so that is being addressed now
Civic Education
that really really is important
I think we have been pushing
for civics now probably for
20 years I have been running elections
for over 40 years
we are pushing civics
as a national comprehensive program
for a number of years
and I think it is really important just to
educate electors
what does the local government do
why is it so important to exercise their vote etc
in complaint management
there is processes in our legislation
now that people can complain
and do
to me there are processes in place
where they can go directly to the police
and then alleged offence
we can submit things to the police
directly
so I think that is covered now
I think
that really covers
our six conclusions
and recommendations
I am more than happy to take any questions
we have a number of questions
first one Mr Carl Bates
thanks very much chair and thanks for the work you do
I am interested in the special vote point
and understand the occupation point
I have quite a bit of feedback around
the challenges with special votes
through the election
do you have any insight into
the percentage of
the votes that were
done with council
officers or with the council
support programs across the country
versus special votes done
by other people
in terms of what was accepted
and what wasn't
we probably do things slightly different
in our competitors
we ourselves process all special votes
the councils themselves do not
so all special votes come
to me to my office
and my staff process those
we do not put them out to the council staff
to do
so I suppose what I am meaning is
in my case for example
I did my special vote
in the council office with a council staff member
do you have
any insight into
all of the votes say for example
completed by those council officers
that came through to you
the percentage of those that actually
were valid versus that weren't
compared to special votes
that were done through other means
does that make sense
yes
no matter
where they are
received or who receives them
they all still come back to
our staff so we have a consistent
approach of marking those
or of checking those
yes
I think the question is more
aligned to
the percentage of special votes
are filled in at a council office
provided in front of a council person
staff member
how many of those
percentage of those that may have been disallowed
versus allow
I don't have that
we do issue a lot of special votes
so we have an 0800 number
so someone can ring up
and we will send it out so we have no control over that
so we'll send them out
there is instructions on it
but we're not sort of standing over them saying
don't forget to fill that out
if someone is coming into the office
a council office or library
we have that ability but not those with
remote where it's through the post
yes
if I may
someone may request a special vote
through a council office
but then they might just take it home
fill it out at home
and then put it back into the postal system
we know it's been issued by a council office
but we don't know the
circumstances as how
that was filled in
thank you
I understand
Kamala
thank you I just had a question around
the special votes
and the fact that
occupation means that a blank occupation
box means you can't count them
where exactly is that
specified
regulation
it's in the
it's in the regulations
thank you
I've got a question from Dan
Rose Mwan
thank you
an interesting point you had in your summary
around factors that contribute to a
trend in voter decline
and it was non-resident rate-payer
complexities
and I was just wondering how
that was leading to a decline
in voter turnout
our number of
non-resident rate-payer electors
each triangle election is
steadily declining
there is quite a complex
enrollment process
that a person must do so you
live outside the district you pay
rates within the district you are eligible
to vote but there is quite a
complex process to go through
a stringent
enrollment form which is
regulations and that's
a bit of a barrier we think
for that process
do you think it's worth scrapping that at all?
a personal view
or an official view
a personal view is extremely
expensive and we get very
few on that role
okay is that official
or is that personal
that's
that's personal I better be careful
that's personal
you've only been doing it for 40 years
or 4 decades whatever
last question from Celia Wade Brown
thank you chair
and thank you for bringing up
something other people haven't
which is when a candidate
is unopposed
and I know that during the campaign
this has explained to me
that if the candidate is unopposed
then they don't necessarily have to
go in the candidate booklet
you've said that you've got some software
now that says
if they are on the voting
document then you better have something
in the candidate booklet does that now
mean that practically
you will
have something I mean
I suppose the mayor runs unopposed
you'll have something about the mayor
because my view is that if you're looking at
the makeover of a councillor as a whole
you want to know who's there
unopposed as well as
the ones where there's a contest
no that's not what that meant
that meant that we cannot have a repeat
of the apotheca situation
where we had candidates
on the voting document missing from the booklet
that is now to be addressed
what you're referring to is
sorry I can't hear
sorry just say that again
I think what you're referring to
well what I was referring to
is the apotheca situation
where we had them
on the voting document but they
did not appear in the booklet
no no I'm not talking about that
I'm talking about the example where
you had people were running
unopposed
and therefore you
complied with the legal requirements
and did not put them in the candidate
booklet
is there anything that
stops you being able
to put them in the candidate
booklet?
I think we raised the issue
of potential confusion
of electors that they're saying
why can't I vote for this person
because they're in the booklet so that's one thing
the second thing is if it
was to be adopted it would have to be
a national thing would have to everyone
in the country should do the same
so then your statement
that your software
checks against
who's in the list
so you're saying if it's unopposed
you can't do a vote of no confidence
or anything like that can you
there?
okay that answers that thank you
so just to go back to the occupation
the troublesome requirement
for that
is there a legislative change
is that just want to be clear what is the nature
that wouldn't require a legislative change
no regulatory change not a
legislative change
that's an important distinction
okay that's very helpful
hey now thank you for your contribution
this morning thank you for what you've done
and do it's been
great to have you on this morning
thank you very much
now last
I submitted this morning
Jeann who is on here
good morning how are you
how are you
we've got five minutes with you
yeah
so my name is Yeta De Jong
I live in Waipu
in Northland
I grew up in a little place called
Korpoorahi in Haureke
and I'm a
Tata Treaty of
Dutch descent
so I
was very concerned about the local
elections for a number of reasons
one is that
my son who's male
has always come to our place
was dropped off the electoral
role even though
he's never changed his address
so
I'm just concerned about
he's back on it now
he's
23 years old
I'm just concerned
about what's going to happen
next election
where now the law
has changed and
people
can't do
same day enrolments or enrol within
two weeks of an election
what's going to happen
if they've had paperwork to say
they're on the electoral role
and then they turn up and they're told they're not
so I guess that's a
concern that I'm looking
to have answered in this process
my other big concern is
although I live in the Whangarei
electorate
the electorate next door to me is
Kaipara and I'm aware that
there was only 21 votes
between the top two
mayoral candidates
but 288
special votes were disallowed
and just
listening to the previous conversation
you know perhaps
has helped to explain some things
but I just don't
really understand how a vote can be
accepted as a special vote
and then later
disallowed because
that person was not on the electoral role
or their details weren't up to date
because I just think to myself
well if their details
weren't up to date or they were not on the role
why were they allowed to make the special vote
and
yeah it just
and then when the
second candidate Snow Tani applied for a
recount
the judge disallowed it because
they said well it would be more appropriate
to run an inquiry into the wider conduct
of the election
but that also wasn't done
so it just feels very much to me like
because I'm aware that
there are a large number of
voters particularly Māori
that fell off the roll
and
so they were often the ones doing the special votes
so
first Māori were dropped off the roll
then when they
made a special vote over 60%
of them weren't counted
and then when
the results were questioned
a judge didn't allow a review
because the wrong question was asked
it just feels very
much like a deliberate campaign
to prevent a Māori candidate
from winning in that electorate
which is known for
its previous
very racist anti Māori mayor
and
yeah so it's just
questions I feel that
I would like this inquiry to
answer
and I just feel that I
don't feel satisfied with the results
of the election particularly
in the Kaipura area
because I don't feel like they were fair
and lastly
I do support the
use of community voting boxes
and I use one myself
but I would like to see more of them
in smaller towns like Waipū
because I had to drive
45 minutes each way to get to the nearest one
and
that's all I've got to say really
and happy to answer questions
or get answers to some of mine
okay
thank you for that contribution
obviously the postal box
is very interesting
and I'm just going to say to you
it's not the purpose of the select committee
to look into specific issues like that
we're dealing with the principles
of better local government
election
voting process
but thank you for bringing those to attention anyway
alright
right thank you
that brings us to a close
everyone we're now
going to private session
Sam and Nick I'm going to ask
you to
vacate the room
as we put it